# Regular expressions
For more detail, read the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html).

The regular expression library `re` must be imported into your program before you can use it. The simplest use of the regular expression library is the `search()` function. The following program demonstrates a trivial use of the search function.

```python
# Search for lines that contain 'From'
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt')
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    if re.search('From:', line):
        print(line)
```

The power of the regular expressions comes when we add special characters to the search string that allow us to more precisely control which lines match the string. Adding these special characters to our regular expression allow us to do sophisticated matching and extraction while writing very little code.

For example, the caret character is used in regular expressions to match "the beginning" of a line. We could change our program to only match lines where "From:" was at the beginning of the line as follows:

```python
# Search for lines that start with 'From'
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt')
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    if re.search('^From:', line):
        print(line)
```

## Character matching in regular expressions

```python
# Search for lines that start with From and have an at sign
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt')
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    if re.search('^From:.+@', line):
        print(line)
```

The search string `^From:.+@` will successfully match lines that start with "From:", followed by one or more characters (`.+`), followed by an at-sign. So this will match the following line:

```python
From: stephen.marquard@uct.ac.za
```

You can think of the `.+` wildcard as expanding to match all the characters between the colon character and the at-sign.

```python
From:.+@
```

## Extracting data using regular expressions
If we want to extract data from a string in Python we can use the `findall()` method to extract all of the substrings which match a regular expression.

```python
# Search for lines that have an at sign between characters
import re
hand = open('mbox-short.txt')
for line in hand:
    line = line.rstrip()
    x = re.findall('\S+@\S+', line)
    if len(x) > 0:
        print(x)
```

Since `findall()` returns a list, we simply check if the number of elements in our returned list is more than zero to print only lines where we found at least one substring that looks like an email address.

Square brackets are used to indicate a set of multiple acceptable characters we are willing to consider matching. In a sense, the `\S` is asking to match the set of "non-whitespace characters".

## Summary
Here are some of those special characters and character sequences:

`^` Matches the beginning of the line.

`$` Matches the end of the line.

`.` Matches any character (a wildcard).

`\s` Matches a whitespace character.

`\S` Matches a non-whitespace character (opposite of \s).

`*` Applies to the immediately preceding character(s) and indicates to match zero or more times.

`*?` Applies to the immediately preceding character(s) and indicates to match zero or more times in "non-greedy mode".

`+` Applies to the immediately preceding character(s) and indicates to match one or more times.

`+?` Applies to the immediately preceding character(s) and indicates to match one or more times in "non-greedy mode".

`?` Applies to the immediately preceding character(s) and indicates to match zero or one time.

`??` Applies to the immediately preceding character(s) and indicates to match zero or one time in "non-greedy mode".

`[aeiou]` Matches a single character as long as that character is in the specified set. In this example, it would match "a", "e", "i", "o", or "u", but no other characters.

`[a-z0-9]` You can specify ranges of characters using the minus sign. This example is a single character that must be a lowercase letter or a digit.

`[^A-Za-z]` When the first character in the set notation is a caret, it inverts the logic. This example matches a single character that is anything other than an uppercase or lowercase letter.

`( )` When parentheses are added to a regular expression, they are ignored for the purpose of matching, but allow you to extract a particular subset of the matched string rather than the whole string when using `findall()`.

`\b` Matches the empty string, but only at the start or end of a word.

`\B` Matches the empty string, but not at the start or end of a word.

`\d` Matches any decimal digit; equivalent to the set [0-9].

`\D` Matches any non-digit character; equivalent to the set [^0-9].

## Glossary
| Name | Description | 
| --- | --- | 
| **brittle code** | Code that works when the input data is in a particular format but is prone to breakage if there is some deviation from the correct format. We call this "brittle code" because it is easily broken. |
| **greedy matching** | The notion that the + and * characters in a regular expression expand outward to match the largest possible string. |
| **grep** | A command available in most Unix systems that searches through text files looking for lines that match regular expressions. The command name stands for "Generalized Regular Expression Parser". |
| **regular expression** | A language for expressing more complex search strings. A regular expression may contain special characters that indicate that a search only matches at the beginning or end of a line or many other similar capabilities. |
| **wild card** | A special character that matches any character. In regular expressions the wild-card character is the period. |