# Python and Web Services
Wire Protocol - what we send on the wire (across the net) - how the data leaves one system (f.e. Python), transits a network, and enters another system (f.e. Java)

**XML** (older) and **JSON** (lighter)

## eXtensible Markup Language - XML
XML looks very similar to HTML, but XML is more structured than HTML. Here is a sample of an XML document:

```
<person>
  <name>Chuck</name>
  <phone type="intl">
    +1 734 303 4456
  </phone>
  <email hide="yes" />
</person>
```

Each pair of opening (f.e. `<person>`) and closing tags (f.e. `</person>`) represents an *element* or *node* with the same name as the tag (f.e. `person`). Each element can have some text, some attributes (f.e. `hide`), and other nested elements. If an XML element is empty, then it may be depicted by a self-closing tag (f.e. `<email />`).

Often it is helpful to think of an XML document as a tree structure where there is a top element, and other tags are drawn as children of their parent elements.

XML does not care about indentation.

## XML Schema
- description of the legal format of an XML document
- often used to specify a *contract* between systems ("My system will only accept XML that conforms to this particular Schema.")
- it says what kind of tag this is, how much data you're supposed to put in it, can you have any child tags underneath is?, etc.
- there are many XML languages, XSD is the most used one 
  - `xs:element`, `xs:sequence`, `xs:complexType`
  - time has to be `yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ssZ` in UTC

### Parsing XML
```
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET

data = '''
<person>
  <name>Chuck</name>
  <phone type="intl">
    +1 734 303 4456
  </phone>
  <email hide="yes" />
</person>'''

tree = ET.fromstring(data)
print('Name:', tree.find('name').text)
print('Attr:', tree.find('email').get('hide'))
```

The triple single quote (`'''`), as well as the triple double quote (`"""`), allow for the creation of strings that span multiple lines.

Calling `fromstring` converts the string representation of the XML into a "tree" of XML elements. When the XML is in a tree, we have a series of methods we can call to extract portions of data from the XML string. The `find` function searches through the XML tree and retrieves the element that matches the specified tag.

```
Name: Chuck
Attr: yes
```

Using an XML parser such as `ElementTree` has the advantage that while the XML in this example is quite simple, it turns out there are many rules regarding valid XML, and using `ElementTree` allows us to extract data from XML without worrying about the rules of XML syntax.

### Looping through nodes
Often the XML has multiple nodes and we need to write a loop to process all of the nodes. 

```
import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET

input = '''
<stuff>
  <users>
    <user x="2">
      <id>001</id>
      <name>Chuck</name>
    </user>
    <user x="7">
      <id>009</id>
      <name>Brent</name>
    </user>
  </users>
</stuff>'''

stuff = ET.fromstring(input)
lst = stuff.findall('users/user')
print('User count:', len(lst))

for item in lst:
    print('Name', item.find('name').text)
    print('Id', item.find('id').text)
    print('Attribute', item.get('x'))
```

The `findall` method retrieves a Python list of subtrees that represent the user structures in the XML tree. Then we can write a `for` loop that looks at each of the user nodes, and prints the `name` and `id` text elements as well as the `x` attribute from the user node.

```
User count: 2
Name Chuck
Id 001
Attribute 2
Name Brent
Id 009
Attribute 7
```

It is important to include all parent level elements in the `findall` statement except for the top level element (e.g., `users/user`). Otherwise, Python will not find any desired nodes.

## JavaScript Object Notation - JSON
The JSON format was inspired by the object and array format used in the JavaScript language. But since Python was invented before JavaScript, Python’s syntax for dictionaries and lists influenced the syntax of JSON. So the format of JSON is nearly identical to a combination of Python lists and dictionaries.

```
import json

data = '''
{
  "name" : "Chuck",
  "phone" : {
    "type" : "intl",
    "number" : "+1 734 303 4456"
   },
   "email" : {
     "hide" : "yes"
   }
}'''

info = json.loads(data)
print("Name:", info["name"])
print("Hide:", info["email"]["hide"])
```

In XML, we can add attributes like "intl" to the "phone" tag. In JSON, we simply have key-value pairs. Also the XML "person" tag is gone, replaced by a set of outer curly braces.

In general, JSON structures are simpler than XML because JSON has fewer capabilities than XML. But JSON has the advantage that it maps directly to some combination of dictionaries and lists. And since nearly all programming languages have something equivalent to Python’s dictionaries and lists, JSON is a very natural format to have two cooperating programs exchange data.

## Application Programming Interfaces - API
The general name for these application-to-application contracts is Application Program Interfaces (APIs). When we use an API, generally one program makes a set of services available for use by other applications and publishes the APIs (i.e., the "rules") that must be followed to access the services provided by the program.

When we begin to build our programs where the functionality of our program includes access to services provided by other programs, we call the approach a *Service-oriented architecture* (SOA). A SOA approach is one where our overall application makes use of the services of other applications. A non-SOA approach is where the application is a single standalone application which contains all of the code necessary to implement the application.

A Service-oriented architecture has many advantages, including: (1) we always maintain only one copy of data and (2) the owners of the data can set the rules about the use of their data. With these advantages, an SOA system must be carefully designed to have good performance and meet the user’s needs.

When an application makes a set of services in its API available over the web, we call these *web services*.

## Security and API usage
It is quite common that you need an API key to make use of a vendor's API. The general idea is that they want to know who is using their services and how much each user is using. Perhaps they have free and pay tiers of their services or have a policy that limits the number of requests that a single individual can make during a particular time period.

Sometimes once you get your API key, you simply include the key as part of POST data or perhaps as a parameter on the URL when calling the API.

Other times, the vendor wants increased assurance of the source of the requests and so they expect you to send cryptographically signed messages using shared keys and secrets. A very common technology that is used to sign requests over the Internet is called *OAuth*. 

## Glossary
| Name | Description | 
| --- | --- | 
| **API** | Application Program Interface - A contract between applications that defines the patterns of interaction between two application components. |
| **ElementTree** | A built-in Python library used to parse XML data. |
| **JSON** | JavaScript Object Notation - A format that allows for the markup of structured data based on the syntax of JavaScript Objects. |
| **SOA** | Service-Oriented Architecture - When an application is made of components connected across a network. |
| **XML** | eXtensible Markup Language - A format that allows for the markup of structured data. |